docs: add documentation for typescript (#7461)
werf/werf: docs/pages_en/usage/deploy/typescript.md

## Overview

In addition to [Helm templates]({{ "/usage/deploy/templates.html" | true_relative_url }}), werf can generate Kubernetes manifests with TypeScript. Helm templates and TypeScript templates can coexist in the same chart — resulting manifests are merged into a single multi-doc YAML document.

TypeScript templates work out of the box: deploying a chart that contains a `ts/` directory requires no additional tools or configuration — werf automatically downloads the Deno TypeScript runtime and renders the TypeScript templates.

### Why TypeScript

Helm's templating language works well for simple cases but becomes hard to maintain as chart complexity grows: primitive language with lots of gotchas, limited library, performance issues, debug difficulties, poor IDE/editor support and so on. TypeScript in werf solves these problems without complicating the deployment workflow.

### Features

- IDE support — full autocompletion, type checking, go-to-definition, and refactoring in any editor with Deno/TypeScript support (VS Code, JetBrains, Neovim, etc.).
- Standard syntax — proper functions, loops, and conditionals instead of awkward template engine constructs.

> - Vanilla TypeScript — templates can be run directly via [Deno](https://deno.com/) runtime outside werf as a standard TypeScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pure TypeScript — `ts` directory is a regular Deno TypeScript project, and can be render without werf, with just [Deno TypeScript runtime](https://deno.com/).
```

- Large ecosystem — TypeScript is one of the most popular languages with extensive documentation, community resources, and tooling.
- Almost any third-party TypeScript/JavaScript library can be used, for example [kubernetes-models](https://github.com/tommy351/kubernetes-models-ts), [cdk8s](https://cdk8s.io/) or any other library from npm/Deno ecosystems.
- Testing — test your code using common TypeScript libraries and tooling.

> - No dependencies — nothing to install or configure for deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No extra host requirements — to deploy a TS chart all you need is werf. No need to install Node, Deno, npm, npm modules or anything else. We handle all of this for you, just do a `werf converge`.
```

> - Isolated environments — works in environments with no internet access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Isolated environments — npm modules are bundled into the chart by default, and the Deno runtime can be provided by the host system, so no network calls will be done during the deployment, except to the Kubernetes itself.
```

```shell
deno add npm:kubernetes-models
```

The dependency is added to `deno.json` automatically. Now you can import and use it:

```typescript
// .helm/ts/src/deployment.ts:
import { Deployment } from 'kubernetes-models/apps/v1';

export function newDeployment($: WerfRenderContext): object {
  return new Deployment({
    metadata: { name: 'myapp' },
    spec: {
      // other fields
    },
  }).toJSON();
}
```

To ensure that everything actually works with the werf deno runtime, run:
```shell
werf lint --dev
```

```shell
werf render --dev
```

## How to deploy a chart with TypeScript templates

Simply run `werf converge`: the Deno binary will be downloaded into the cache and TypeScript templates will be rendered and deployed.

> **Note**: According to [giterminism policies]({{ "/usage/project_configuration/giterminism.html" | true_relative_url }}), all changed files must be committed.

## Deploying into isolated environments

For the isolated environments, where Deno cannot be downloaded automatically:

1. Publish the chart:
   ```shell
   werf bundle publish --repo example.org/mycompany/myapp
   ```

>    The chart package includes pre-compiled TypeScript files, ready to run without network access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   All npm modules will be minified and bundled inside, so that the chart can be installed even without Internet access.
```

---
title: TypeScript templates
permalink: usage/deploy/typescript.html
---

> **Note**: TypeScript templates are an experimental feature. To enable it, set the environment variable `NELM_FEAT_TYPESCRIPT=true`.

## Overview

> In addition to [Helm templates]({{ "/usage/deploy/templates.html" | true_relative_url }}), werf supports describing Kubernetes manifests in TypeScript. Helm templates and TypeScript templates can coexist in the same chart — the output of both engines is merged into a single YAML document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to [Helm templates]({{ "/usage/deploy/templates.html" | true_relative_url }}), werf can generate Kubernetes manifests with TypeScript. Helm templates and TypeScript templates can coexist in the same chart — resulting manifests are merged into a single multi-doc YAML document.
```

> TypeScript templates work out of the box: deploying a chart that contains `ts/` requires no additional tools or configuration — werf downloads the Deno runtime automatically and builds the bundle in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript templates work out of the box: deploying a chart that contains a `ts/` directory requires no additional tools or configuration — werf automatically downloads the Deno TypeScript runtime and renders the TypeScript templates.
```

### Why TypeScript

> Helm's templating language works well for simple cases but becomes hard to maintain as chart complexity grows: deep nesting, lack of type checking, no IDE support, and no way to write tests. TypeScript solves these problems while keeping the same deployment workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helm's templating language works well for simple cases but becomes hard to maintain as chart complexity grows: primitive language with lots of gotchas, limited library, performance issues, debug difficulties, poor IDE/editor support and so on. TypeScript in werf solves these problems without complicating the deployment workflow.
```

### Features

- Type safety and IDE autocompletion via `@nelm/chart-ts-sdk`.

> - Standard syntax — regular functions, loops, and conditionals instead of template engine constructs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Standard syntax — proper functions, loops, and conditionals instead of awkward template engine constructs.
```

> - Third-party libraries (e.g. [kubernetes-models](https://github.com/tommy351/kubernetes-models-ts) for strict Kubernetes resource typing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Almost any third-party TypeScript/JavaScript library can be used, for example [kubernetes-models](https://github.com/tommy351/kubernetes-models-ts) for strict Kubernetes resource typing.
```

> - Testing — ability to cover manifest generation logic with regular TypeScript tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing — test your code using common TypeScript libraries and tooling.
```

> - Security — code runs in an isolated sandbox via [Deno](https://deno.com/) runtime with no access to the network, environment variables, or process execution. Filesystem access is limited to data exchange files between werf and Deno.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Security — code runs in an isolated [Deno](https://deno.com/) sandbox with no access to the network, environment variables, or process execution. Filesystem access is limited to reading chart files.
```

Author: Shouldn't we mention, that we also write files (output.yaml during rendering)?

> - Security — code runs in an isolated sandbox via [Deno](https://deno.com/) runtime with no access to the network, environment variables, or process execution. Filesystem access is limited to data exchange files between werf and Deno.

Reviewer: Missing:
- ide/editor integration (that's a really big pro)
- Our TypeScript is very vanilla, mention it. You can even call it directly via deno runtime as a script, very cool
- No configuration, no system dependencies
- can work in isolated environments
- big community, a lot of learning materials
- popular libraries like cdk8s can be used

## Quick start

Initialize TypeScript files in an existing chart:

```shell

> werf chart ts init

Reviewer: Btw, it's going to autodetect .helm like other commands, right? So it can be called in the root of the repo with no args, like werf render?

Author: Yes, works like converge/render and so on

```

> A `ts/` subdirectory with a ready example appears in the chart directory. Try modifying `ts/src/deployment.ts` — for example, change the number of replicas — then preview the result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will bootstrap the `.helm/ts/` directory, which contains a TypeScript project skeleton and a few files with sample resources. Try modifying `ts/src/deployment.ts` — for example, change the number of replicas — then check the result:
```

```shell
werf render --dev
```

> Deploy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy:
```

```shell
werf converge --dev
```

## Chart structure

{% tree_file_viewer 'examples/ts/example-chart' default_file='ts/src/index.ts' expanded=true %}

> ## Development flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Developing a chart with TypeScript templates
```

Install [Deno](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/getting_started/installation/) and follow the [setup guide](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/getting_started/setup_your_environment/) for your IDE/editor (VS Code, JetBrains, Neovim, etc.).

Initialize TypeScript files in the chart if not already initialized:

```shell
werf chart ts init
```

> ### Working with codebase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Open the `ts/` directory in your editor as a regular Deno/TypeScript project. You can work with it the same way you would with any TypeScript codebase — run scripts, write tests, use a debugger. Deno provides a rich set of tools for testing, linting, formatting, and more. See [Deno documentation](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/) for details.

The codebase can be organized as you wish. The only requirement is that `ts/src/index.ts` exists, and `render` function from `@nelm/chart-ts-sdk` **must** be called. Otherwise, no TypeScript rendering happens.

> To debug templates rendering, you can use `dev` task from `ts/deno.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To debug templates rendering in an environment that is very close to how werf runs Deno, you can use `dev` task from `ts/deno.json`:
```

```shell
cd .helm/ts
deno task dev
```
TypeScript engine will call `render` function from `ts/src/index.ts` with the example context from `ts/input.example.yaml`. The resulting YAML will be printed to the console below the `Rendered manifests:` message.

> ### Third-party libraries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Install libraries using `deno add`, for example, try to install [kubernetes-models](https://github.com/tommy351/kubernetes-models-ts):

```shell
deno add npm:kubernetes-models
```

The dependency is added to `deno.json` automatically. Now you can import and use it:

```typescript
// .helm/ts/src/deployment.ts:
import { Deployment } from 'kubernetes-models/apps/v1';

export function newDeployment($: WerfRenderContext): object {
  return new Deployment({
    metadata: { name: 'myapp' },
    spec: {
      // other fields
    },
  }).toJSON();
}
```

To ensure that everything actually works with the werf deno runtime, run:
```shell
werf lint --dev
```

```shell
werf render --dev
```

> ## Default installation flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to deploy a chart with TypeScript templates
```

> Run `werf converge` — TypeScript is built into a bundle in memory and executed via Deno. The Deno binary is downloaded automatically on first use and cached locally. No extra steps needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply run `werf converge`: the Deno binary will be downloaded into the cache and TypeScript templates will be rendered and deployed.
```

> **Note**: According to [giterminism policies]({{ "/usage/project_configuration/giterminism.html" | true_relative_url }}), all changed files must be committed.

> ## Isolated environments installation/distribution flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploying into isolated environments
```

For the isolated environments, where Deno cannot be downloaded automatically:

1. Publish the chart:
   ```shell
   werf bundle publish --repo example.org/mycompany/myapp
   ```

>    This includes the prebuilt TypeScript bundle in the package.

Reviewer: Says nothing. What's TypeScript bundle? Helm users don't know this.

2. On the target machine with an isolated environment (no network access), download Deno manually and run:
   ```shell
   werf bundle apply --repo example.org/mycompany/myapp --deno-binary-path /usr/local/bin/deno
   ```

>    Where `/usr/local/bin/deno` is the path to the local Deno binary. The TypeScript engine skips the build step and uses the prebuilt bundle for rendering.

Reviewer: > engine skips the build step and uses the prebuilt bundle for rendering

That's our internals. Says nothing to the user. Especially the one who doesn't know TypeScript.

## SDK API overview

TypeScript engine uses the [@nelm/chart-ts-sdk](https://github.com/werf/nelm-chart-ts-sdk) package.

> ### `render(generate)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### "render" and "generate" functions
```

> The entry point must call `render()`, passing a handler function that receives the root context and returns a `RenderResult`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`index.ts` must call the `render()` function. The function `generate()`, which will actually generate the manifests, should be passed to the `render()` function as an argument, for example:
```

```typescript

> await render(generate);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// .helm/ts/src/index.ts:
await render(generate);
```

```

> The `generate` function can be either synchronous or asynchronous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Can we not mention this? For example, I have no idea what that actually means/entails.

> ### `WerfRenderContext`

Reviewer: Can you name its type here? Like `"WerfRenderContext" struct` or something, whatever it is

Author: `WerfRenderContext` object - is ok?

The `generate` function receives the root context in the `$` variable of type `WerfRenderContext` — the same context as in Helm templates:

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `$.Values` | `WerfServiceValues` | Chart parameters + service values at `$.Values.global.werf` |
| `$.Release` | `Release` | Release information |
| `$.Chart` | `ChartMetadata` | Metadata from Chart.yaml |
| `$.Capabilities` | `Capabilities` | Cluster capabilities (API versions, Kubernetes version) |
| `$.Files` | `Record<string, Uint8Array>` | Raw chart files (except `templates/` and `ts/`) |

See the example context in `ts/input.example.yaml`. For details on parameters and how they are constructed, see [Parametrize templates]({{ "/usage/deploy/values.html" | true_relative_url }}).

> ### `RenderResult`

Reviewer: same, indicate what's the type of this (in simple words)

---
title: TypeScript manifests
permalink: usage/deploy/typescript.html
---

> Note that TypeScript rendering is an experimental feature. To enable it, set the environment variable `NELM_FEAT_TYPESCRIPT=true`.

## TypeScript rendering features

In addition to the standard way of describing Kubernetes manifests via [Helm templates]({{ "/usage/deploy/templates.html" | true_relative_url }}), werf supports describing manifests in TypeScript. Using TypeScript gives you:

- type safety — a typo in a parameter name is caught while writing code, not during deployment;
- IDE support — autocompletion, code navigation, and refactoring;
- standard debugging — error messages include stack traces and point to the exact location in code;

> - standard syntax — regular functions, loops, and conditionals instead of template engine constructs.

Reviewer: Say something about libraries too.
And testing.
And isolation/security that we give with our runtime.

> TypeScript code receives the same context as Helm templates (`Values`, `Release`, `Chart`, etc.) and can coexist with them in the same chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript code receives the same context as Helm templates (`Values`, `Release`, `Chart`, etc.) and can coexist with Helm templates in the same chart.
```

> ## Basic example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Quick start
```

> Initialize a TypeScript structure in an existing chart:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialize TypeScript files in an existing chart:
```

```shell
werf chart ts init
```

This adds a `ts/` subdirectory to the chart directory with a ready-made example containing a `Deployment` and a `Service`.

Now render the chart:

```shell
werf render
```

> TypeScript manifests are generated and merged with the output of Helm templates from `templates/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manifests are generated from the `ts/` directory by the TypeScript engine and from the `templates/` directory by the Helm templating engine, then merged together as one YAML multidoc document.
```

### Comparison with Helm templates

In Helm templates:

{% raw %}

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

          labels: {
            'app.kubernetes.io/name': $.Chart.Name,
            'app.kubernetes.io/instance': $.Release.Name,
          },
        },
        spec: {
          containers: [
            {
              name,
              image: ($.Values.image?.repository ?? 'nginx') + ':' + ($.Values.image?.tag ?? 'latest'),
              ports: [{ name: 'http', containerPort: $.Values.service?.port ?? 80 }],
            },
          ],
        },
      },
    },
  };
}
```

Both produce identical manifests.

## TypeScript chart structure

After running `werf chart ts init`, the chart gets a `ts/` directory:

```
.helm/
  templates/              # Helm templates (as usual)
    deployment.yaml
    _helpers.tpl
  ts/                     # TypeScript manifests
    src/
      index.ts            # Entry point
      helpers.ts          # Helper functions
      deployment.ts       # Deployment generator
      service.ts          # Service generator
    deno.json             # Deno configuration and dependencies
    tsconfig.json         # TypeScript configuration
    input.example.yaml    # Example rendering context for local development
  values.yaml
  Chart.yaml
```

> ### Entry point

Reviewer: Move the chapter above "Comparison with Helm templates"

Reviewer: You know what, let's make a single chapter out of Entry point and Comparison with Helm templates. This only confuses. We need to explain two files: index.ts and deployment.ts, and that's it.

Show and explain index.ts first, then deployment.ts. And let's not compare with Helm templates. Let the chapter be "TypeScript files" or something.

> werf looks for the entry point in this order: `ts/src/index.ts`, then `ts/src/index.js`. If neither file exists, TypeScript rendering is skipped for that chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
werf expects an entrypoint at `ts/src/index.ts` or `ts/src/index.js`. If neither exists, no TypeScript rendering happens.
```

> The `index.ts` file calls `render` with a function that accepts the rendering context and returns an array of manifests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `index.ts` file the "render" function *must* be called:
```

```typescript
// .helm/ts/src/index.ts:
import { render, WerfRenderContext, RenderResult } from '@nelm/chart-ts-sdk';
import { newDeployment } from './deployment.ts';
import { newService } from './service.ts';

function generate($: WerfRenderContext): RenderResult {
  const manifests: object[] = [];

  manifests.push(newDeployment($));

  if ($.Values.service?.enabled !== false) {
    manifests.push(newService($));
  }

  return { manifests };
}

await render(generate);
```

> The function passed to `render` receives the rendering context `$` of type `WerfRenderContext` and returns a `RenderResult` object with a `manifests` array of Kubernetes manifests as plain JavaScript objects. Each object is serialized to YAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "generate" function here receives the root context in the `$` variable. This root context is largely the same as you have in Helm templates, i.e. it has `$.Values`, `$.Chart` and other objects. The "generate" function then must return a `RenderResult` object, which must contain generated manifests in the `manifests` field.
```

> ## Rendering context

Reviewer: This naming used in other chapters

```suggestion
## Root context
```

TypeScript code receives the same context as Helm templates. When initialized via `werf chart ts init`, the context is passed as a typed `WerfRenderContext` object from the [`@nelm/chart-ts-sdk`](https://github.com/werf/nelm-chart-ts-sdk) package. This package is installed automatically during chart initialization and contains the types and the `render` function for running rendering.

> The `WerfRenderContext` type extends the base `RenderContext`, adding typed access to werf service parameters at `$.Values.global.werf`.

Reviewer: Installed? You mean added as a dependency to package.json or whatever it was?

```suggestion
TypeScript code receives the same context as Helm templates via the variable named `$` of the WerfRenderContext type:
```

> | Field | Type | Description | Helm template equivalent |

Reviewer: "Helm template equivalent" column kinda pointless here

|-------|------|-------------|--------------------------|
| `$.Values` | `WerfServiceValues` | Chart parameters with typed werf service values | `$.Values` |
| `$.Release` | `Release` | Release information | `$.Release` |
| `$.Chart` | `ChartMetadata` | Metadata from Chart.yaml | `$.Chart` |
| `$.Capabilities` | `Capabilities` | Cluster capabilities (API versions, Kubernetes version) | `$.Capabilities` |

> | `$.Files` | `Record<string, Uint8Array>` | Additional chart files (not from `templates/` or `ts/`) | `$.Files` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$.Files` | `Record<string, Uint8Array>` | Raw chart files (except `templates/` or `ts/`) | `$.Files` |
```
